Introduction to Computer Science for Other Faculties (2 units)
Meaning of Computer science as a discipline, Concepts of hardware and software;
basic subsystems of a digital computer; characteristics of a digital computer;
devices/media; types/classes of computer emphasizing the PC; history of computers;
problem-solving: algorithm, flowchart, pseudo code, program/data; running a
program; programming: introduction to Java/BASIC programming language syntax
and programming = COS101$

Computing Practice (2 units)
Simple programming exercises; control structures; functions, arrays, storage classes,
pointers, enumeration types, C++ classes; Other object-oriented principles; reference types,
function overloading, copy constructor, template classes, inheritance, virtual functions,
virtual base classes, exception handling using object-oriented principles. = COS102$

Computer Hardware Organization (2 units)
Organization and function of control unit (cu), arithmetic-logic unit (au), registers; bus
structures and communication between CPU, memory and peripheral devices; Number
systems: conversion between bases (binary, octal, decimal, hexadecimal); Binary
arithmetic; weighted and non-weighted binary codes; 1’s and 2’s complement
operation methods; Introduction to machine language; data and instruction formats. = COS103$

Introduction to Database System (2 units)
Introduction to databases; database design and creation using a database management system.
Functions of a database; uses in business and industry. Introduction to the following: data
dictionaries, normalization, data integrity, data modeling, and creation of simple tables,
editing a database, queries, reports, and forms using SQL. = COS104$

Introduction to Computer Science for Physical Sciences (2 units)
Concepts of hardware and software; basic subsystems of a digital computer;
characteristics of digital computer; devices/media. Types/classes of computer
emphasizing the PC; History of computers. Problem-solving: algorithm, flowchart,
pseudo code, program/data, running a program; Programming: introduction to
Java/BASIC programming language syntax and programming; Booting and shutdown;
Types of operating system; User interface; managing information, computer malware
(virus, etc.); computer network; Internet and web usage, e-mail; instant-messaging
etc; Office applications; use of a statistical package and a database management
system. = COS105$

Computer Programming (2 units)
An IDE; The java virtual machine, Writing a java program, packages, simple Java programs;
Data types; Control constructs; Classes; Keyboard Input, File I/O Using Byte Streams,
Character Streams, File I/O Using Character Streams, Buffered Streams, File I/O Using a
Buffered Stream, Keyboard input, file I/O using byte stream using a Buffered Stream,
Writing Text Files in Java, Introduction, The File Class, Standard Streams. = COS201$

Software Engineering I (2 units)
Basic concept of software engineering, software development process: problem
analysis, requirement gathering, design, implementation, testing and maintenance,
choice of programming language; Object Oriented Analysis and Design (OOAD);
Implementation of model/non-model based engineering processes. = COS202$

Introduction to Microcomputer Systems (2 units)
Introduction to microprocessor systems; Functional description of different
microprocessor architectures; system operation and interfacing; basic memory
decoding and interfacing, types of instructions and instruction format;
Microprocessors in instrumentation and control; Microcomputer-based A/D and D/A
converters; Design, construction, programming and testing of microprocessor control
systems. A practical microcomputer-based system design should be produced by each
student; = COS203$

Introduction to Digital System Design (2 units)
Boolean algebra; gates, gating devices, combinational logic, sequential logic, methods
of synthesis and minimization of combinational circuits; Designs with multiplexers
and demultiplexers, PLI, Memories: latch, flip-flop, shift-register, RAM and ROM,
Cache as well as microprocessors. = COS204$

Assembly Language Programming (2 units)
Practical examples of machine code (instruction) e.g. hand coding, assembly code and
assembler usage; Types of assembler; Dump of machine language; Listing of
machine/assembly language from high-level language; Format of PC assembly
language instructions; Microinstruction formats; Segmentation and linkage;
Subroutine, device (e.g., mouse, keyboard) control; running simple assembly language
program using a common microprocessor and debugger. = COS231$

Data Structure (2 units)
Primitive data types; data structures: array, record, strings, list; String processing;
Data representation in memory: Static and heap allocation; Runtime storage management, pointers and references; Implementation strategies for stack, queue, and
hash table, graph and tree; Choosing the right data structure; High-level language data
types and data-handling facilities. = COS232$

 Data and Computer Communications (2 units)
Introduction: data and information, data processing system, data communication systems,
signals; Introduction to analog and digital Time and frequency domain concepts, Fourier
Transform. Introduction to Analog and digital signals, A/D conversions, Fourier series,
measure of communication channel, characteristics, Nyquist and Shannon information
capacity, transmission media, noise and distortion, modulation and demodulation,
multiplexing and demultiplexing, synchronous and asynchronous data transmission; Error
detection and control techniques. = COS242$

 Computer Applications (2 units)
Booting and shutdown; User interface; Types of operating system; managing
information, computer malware (virus, etc.); word processing; presentations; Internet
and Web usage; e-mail; instant-messaging etc; Spreadsheet analysis (statistical
applications e.g. SPSS, Excel, etc); use of a statistical package and a database
management system. = COS304$

Switching Algebra and Discrete Structures (3 units)
Boolean algebra; Combinational and sequential circuits/designs; Directed graphs, cycles
connectivity; Finite State Machine; State transition graphs, ASM charts, Graph and network
related problems; Algebraic systems: group, homomorphism, congruence; Applications to
machine structures, correctness proof. = COS311$

Operating Systems (3 units)
Introduction to processes; Anatomy of a simple operating system (e.g. DOS);
processor management; memory management, protection; Types of operating system;
Multi-programming concepts and requirements, multi-tasking, real-time, multiprocessing systems; issues based on semaphore and monitor concepts; Installation and
optimization of 16-bit, 32-bit and 64-bit operating systems. Linux file system; shell
programming; filters and pipelines; Virtual memory. Anatomy of a multi-user
operating system (e.g. Linux, Windows); Device drivers; OS interaction with devices;
event-driven execution. = COS331$

Software Engineering II (2 units)
Requirement engineering, systems model, process models, DFDS, state transition, state charts,
Data models, ER modeling, object-oriented modeling using UML, software verification and
validation, software testing; software quality assurance; Programming environments,
requirement analysis and design modeling tools, testing tools, tool integration mechanism. = COS333$

 Automata Theory and Formal Languages (2 units)
Basic set theory; function; alphabet, string, string concatenation, definition of an automaton;
Classes of automata: deterministic, non-deterministic automata; Grammar; Types of
grammar: context-free and context-sensitive; Formal languages; Regular expression; Turing
machine. = COS335$

 Artificial Intelligence I (2 units)
Introduction to artificial intelligence; Problem formulation and search: heuristic search,
production system; Semantic network and frame; Propositional logic: first order predicate
logic, fuzzy logic; Other methods for reasoning; An Introduction to pattern recognition;
Multilayer neural networks; Self-organizing neural networks = COS337$

 Computer Architecture (3 units)
Basic logic design, data representation, instruction formats, basic computer
organization and design; CPU design: functional organization and implementation of
simple data paths, control units; hardwired realization versus micro- programmed
realization, instruction pipeline, memory systems; memory organization; multipleprocessor systems; general characteristics of memories; memory operations; Magnetic
recording; semi-conductor memory, charged-coupled devices, magnetic bubbles;
Memory addressing; memory hierarchy, virtual memory; Control systems, hardware
control, micro-programmed control, asynchronous control, I/O control; Introduction to
fault-tolerance computing. = COS341$

 Laboratory for Digital System Design (3 units)
General instrumentation, Use of meter in DC and in AC measurements; rectifiers,
electrodynamometer and wattmeter, instrument transformers; Oscilloscope; Square
wave, pulse, signal and function generators, wave analyzers; Logic probes/analyzers;
Troubleshooting; Analyzing electronic circuits; Implementation of digital logic
circuits. = COS351$

 Numerical Methods (3 units)
Techniques for the computer implementation (i.e. implementation of the algorithms)
of the following: Interpolation; approximation; numerical integration and
differentiation; solution of non-linear equations; solution of ordinary differential
equations; introduction to partial differential equations. Floating-point arithmetic; use
of mathematical subroutine packages; error analysis and norms; computation of eigen
values and eigenvectors, related topics; numerical solution of boundary-value
problems for ordinary differential equations, solution of non-linear systems of
algebraic equations; least-squares solution of over-determined systems. Not just their
mathematical solutions. = COS411$

 System Modeling and Simulation (2 units)
Basic modelling and simulation concepts and definitions; Random numbers:
pseudorandom number generation and testing; Monte Carlo methods; Statistics for
Modeling and Simulation; Introduction to distribution functions; Simulation – discrete
and continuous event simulation; Modeling methods: visual models and Conceptual
models; Simple theories of Queues, stochastic processes; Design of simulation
experiments; Simulation languages and detailed study of a chosen simulation
language; applications; Lab exercises; Data collection, coding, clearing-completeness;
range consistency; Case studies and interpretation of results. = COS413$

 Computer Process control (2 units)
General overview of industrial process control, Importance of process control (PC), PC types, control
theory basis, components of control loops and ISA symbols, signals, sensors, transducers, indicators,
Recorders, Controllers, Actuators , Controller Algorithms, PC Loops, Advanced control loops:
cascaded control, Batch control, Ratio control, Selective Control and Fuzzy control. Defect prevention
process, process assessments, process capability and maturity levels, signals and process metrics.
Process control technique, specific examples of process controllers. Process control computer;
operating modes, best practice standards and software case studies. = COS415$

 Computer System Performance Evaluation (2 units)
Performance measurement techniques, simulation techniques, analytic techniques,
work-load characterization, performance evaluation in selected problems,
performance evaluation in design problems; evaluation of program performance. = COS417$

 Operation Research (3 units)
Linear programming (formulation and graphic solution, simplex method),
transportation problems; Network Analysis; Project Scheduling Models (PSM and
PERT); Game Theory; Inventory problems; Reliability problems; Dynamic
programming. Network scheduling models (PERT & CPM). = COS419$

 Database Design and Management (3 units)
Foundations of database technologies; Basic concepts; Database structure; Data
description and manipulation languages; SQL; Database management system;
Functions and components of DBMS. File design and access path. Data models;
Normalization; Database connection in Linux/mysql and Windows/Access; Database
access from a programming language. Practical exercises using a standard DBMS.
Analysis of Open Database Connectivity standard; Stored-procedure; Object-oriented
Relational Database Management Systems (e.g. Oracle) should be studied and used.
Data Modeling and Relational Database Design including the use of Entity
Relationship (ER) modeling using practical examples. Report generation. DBMS
terminology and concepts, Transaction Management, concurrency and recovery;
Physical design issues. Database Administrator Functions. = COS421$

 Algorithms (2 units)
Efficiency analysis of algorithm; Asymptotic notations; Algorithm strategies: Brute
force, greedy, divide and conquer, recursive, backtracking, dynamic programming,
heuristics, reduction (transform and conquer); Implementation of data structure. = COS431$

 Compiler Construction (3 units)
Programming language syntax, semantics and pragmatics; Overview of translators;
compilers, assemblers and interpreters; Phases of compilation; Structure of a
compiler; Lexical analysis, syntax analysis, expression analysis, code generation, code
optimization, error detection and recovery; Grammar and language; Construction of
scanner and parser; Internal representation of a program; Recognizers, top-down and
bottom-up; run-time storage organization, LR grammar and analyzers; construction of
LR grammar and analyzer; construction of LR table. Organization of symbol tables;
Translator writing systems. = COS434$

 Computer Graphics and Animation (2 units)
Fundamental concepts in graphics: (Hierarchy of graphics, hardware and software
components: Raster and Vector graphics systems, video display devices, physical
system. Application Program Interface (API), simple color models (RGB, CMYK):
Coordinates system, Two- and three- dimensional transformations (Scaling, rotation,
translation); perspectives, clipping algorithms, hidden lines removal, Bolden surface
removal. Warnock’s method, shading; Curve synthesis and fitting, Contouring.
Organization of interactive graphics; Graphics system: Visual computing- (Computer
graphics, visualization, virtual reality, computer vision). Use visual graphics software
for demonstration e.g. Visual BASIC, Visual JAVA; Animation: 2-D, 3-D dynamics,
solid objects and interference, Scene generation. Surface Treatment. Ray tracing,
radiosity, rendering. New developments. = COS435$

 Expert Systems (2 units)
Overview of expert systems; Structure of expert system; Construction of expert
systems; Expert system shell and other tools for building expert systems, Evaluation
of expert systems performance; Languages and tools of knowledge engineering etc;
Case study of an expert system. = COS436$

 Project Management (2 units)
Project and project life cycle; Project management processes; Structured project
management; Work breakdown structures (WBS): developing WBS, using
WBS to estimate effort and cost; Project scheduling: developing schedules,
network diagrams, PERT and CPM, Gantt chart, using schedules to monitor and
control projects; Resources and resource planning; Cost planning and
budgeting; Change management; Project risk management; Ethical and
commercial issues in project management. = COS437$

 Artificial Intelligence II (2 units)
Review of prepositional and predicate logic, Resolution and theorem proving, Nonmonotonic inference, probabilistic reasoning, Bayes’ theorem, Natural language
processing (information retrieval, language, translation, speech recognition). Machine
learning (Definition and examples, supervised learning, learning, decision trees
learning, neural networks, the nearest neighbour algorithm, learning theory, the
problems of overfitting, unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning). Introduction
to Robotics: (Overview, configuration, planning, sensing, programming, navigation
and control). Expert systems; Introduction to PROLOG, LISP or any other AI
programming language. = COS438$

 Games Programming (2 units)
Overview of Windows Programming, Overview of COM and DirectX, Mathematics of
Rendering 3D Objects, Vectors and Matrices, Matrix Multiplication, Translation, Rotation,
Scaling, View, Projection, Direct3D - Display Modes, Sprites and Fonts, Vertices and
Transformation Matrices, Textures, Depth Buffers, Lighting. DirectX Audio - DirectSound
Playback, DirectSound 3D Effects, Overview of DirectMusic. DirectInput - Mouse
Input, Joystick Input, Keyboard Input, Introduction to OpenGL. = COS439$

 Advanced Computer Networks (3 units)
Computer network: LANs, WANs, MANs, SANs, CNs, Intranets, Extranets and
Internets, network topologies, communication protocol; OSI reference model and
protocol, network technologies (Ethernet, Token ring, FDDI); Internetworking devices
(bridges, routers, repeaters, hub, gateways, switches etc.); Data switching
principles/circuit, message, packet; Design of a wide area network infrastructure;
Analysis of quality of service, congestion, bandwidth, performance trade-off;
LAN/WAN design issues; Wireless technologies: narrow band, spread spectrum, infra
red Bluetooth, etc; Architecture of VSAT and GSM networks. VPNs. = COS441$

 Mobile Communication (2 units)
Fundamentals of mobile communications: Basic digital communication theory; Spread
spectrum communications and CDMA, OFDM and OFDMA; MIMO and Cooperative
Communications; Elementary theory of wireless networks; ,Mobile communication systems ;
Mobile communication engineering, GSM, GPRS, and EDGE, 3GPP Systems, WCDMA,
HSPA, TD-SCDMA, Wireless LAN and Wireless PAN, WiMAX, 3GPP LTE and LTE-A) ;
Future Wireless. = COS442$

 Computer Network Security (2 units)
Foundational concepts in security: risk threats, vulnerability, advanced requirements of
security; Human factors and security: ethics, regulatory environment, compliance and identity
management, social engineering; Principles of secure design: isolation, fail/safe, open, end to
end security; Method of defence: security services, model of inter-network security,
cryptographic algorithms, public and private keys, Brute force attack and network security,
traffic analysis; Special attack types: DOS, buffer, overflows etc. = COS444$

 Advanced Digital Laboratory (3 units)
Understanding and troubleshooting computer hardware circuits: motherboard,
monitor, printer, drive, card, power supplies etc. Modern PC assembling and
disassembling; Hardware and software installations; Input/Output ports, Hard disk
drives, floppy disk drives, motherboards, memories and troubleshooting of digital
circuits using standard equipment. Implementation of specific projects in the
microprocessor laboratory. = COS452$

 Organization of Programming Languages (2 units)
Overview of programming languages; Brief survey of programming paradigms
(Procedural languages, Object-oriented languages, Functional languages, Declarativenon-algorithmic languages, Scripting languages), comparative analysis of
programming languages, the effects of scale on programming methodology; Language
Semantics (Information semantics, Overview of formal semantics; Denotational
semantics; Axiomatic semantics; Operational semantics); The concept of types,
Declaration models (binding, visibility, scope, and lifetime), Overview of typechecking, Garbage. = COS461$

 Structured Programming (2 units)
Structured programming concepts; Object-oriented programming; Invariant relation of
a loop; Nassi-Sheidermann model; stepwise refinement; Program modularization
(bottom-up approach, top-down approach, nested virtual machine approach);
Language features for structured programming; Practical illustration of above
concepts using a RAD, e.g., Visual Basic; Graphical User Interface (GUI) concepts;
Event-driven programming; Time manipulation; graphics; multimedia; device control,
Students learn programming concepts using a project-centred approach. = COS463$

 Concurrent Programming (2 units)
Rationale for concurrent programming; Thread analysis; system components,
hardware features, basic software; operating system nucleus/kernel; user interface,
command and control language, job control; elements of design methodology, parallel
algorithms, issues in parallelism, language features for concurrent programming;
Hardware features; concurrent programming languages. = COS464$

 Web Application Development (2 units)
Introduction to client-server, common gateway interfaces. Common web development
problems and solution using server-side and client-side scripting techniques. Practical
design and development of web pages using industry-standard scripting languages;
XHTML, PHP, Perl; Creation of dynamic web pages. Web standards/technologies;
Web2.0, XML, SOAP, web services, etc. = COS471$
