Design of Intelligent System
Theory of Computation
Database Systems
Control Systems and Robotics
Internet Technology
Agent Technology
Introduction to Quantum Computing
Human Computer Interaction
Expert Systems
Bioinformatics
Machine Learning
Neural Networks
Decision Support Systems


Artificial Intelligence: An overview, Intelligent Systems: Evolution of the concept.
Intelligent Agents: How agent should act, Structure of intelligent agents, Environments.
Problem Solving: Solving problems by searching, Informed search methods, Game playing.
Knowledge and Reasoning: A knowledge based agent, The wumpus world environment,
Representation, Reasoning, Logic, Proportional logic, First order logic: Syntax and
Semantics, Extensions and Notational variation, Using first order logic. Building a
Knowledge Base: Properties of good and bad knowledge base, Knowledge engineering,
General ontology. Interfacing First Order Logic: Interface rules involving quantifiers, An
example proof, Forward and backward chaining, Completeness. Acting Logically: Planning,
Practical planning: Practical planners, Hierarchical decomposition, Conditional planning.
Uncertain Knowledge and Reasoning: Uncertainty, Representing knowledge in an
uncertain domain, The semantics of belief networks, Inference in belief networks. Learning:
Learning from observations: General model of learning agents, Inductive learning, learning
decision trees, Learning in neural and belief networks: Introduction to neural networks,
Perceptrons, Multilayer feedforward network, Application of ANN, Reinforcement learning:
Passive learning in a known environment, Generalization in reinforcement learning, Genetic
algorithms Agents that Communicate: Communication as action, Types of communicating
agents, A formal grammar for a subset of English Expert system: Introduction to expert
system, Representing and using domain knowledge, Expert system shells, Explanation,
Knowledge acquisition Applications: Natural language processing, Perception, Robotics

Formal languages, Chomsky hierarchy, formal computation and machine model, finite
automata, pushdown automata, Turning machines, Church’s Thesis, Recursively enumerable
sets. Diagonal arguments. Reducibility, complexity classes.

A brief introduction to database concepts: File systems and database, and the relational
database model; design concepts and implementation: entity relationship (E-R) modeling
normalization of database tables and structured query language; database design and
implementation. Transaction management and concurrency control and distributed database
management systems, database: privacy, security, failure and recovery. Object-oriented
database design, client/server systems, data warehouse, data mining, databases in electronic
commerce, web database development and database administration

Introduction to Internet, standards and specifications; survey of contemporary internet
technologies; Current Internet tools; Designing and publishing a web server; www
programmed markup languages: Using alternative protocols in www, Adding multimedia
features to www; Server side programming, client programming and database programming
for the web; Security and Privacy.

Introduction to software agents: definition, attributes, different classes of software agents,
uses of agents. Agents and the user experience: user‟s interaction with agents, agents from
direct manipulation to delegation, interface agents, designing agents, direct manipulation
versus agents. Agents for learning and intelligent assistance: agents for information
sharing and coordination, agents that reduce work and information overload, agents for
cooperative learning, the M System. Agent communication, collaboration and mobility:
agent oriented programming, Agent Communication Languages, agent based frameworks,
communicative actions for artificial agents, Mobile agents. Multiagent systems: objectives
and objections, multiagent interactions, communication, Agent security issues, Black Box
Security. The FIPA model for software agents: Agent Lifecycle Management, Message
Transport, Message Structure, Inter-agent Interaction Protocols, Ontologies, Security. Agent
Programming: overview of Java based programming environments- ABLE, AgentBuilder,
Aglets, FIPA-OS, Gossip, JADE, JATLite, Jess, Voyager, ZEUS etc; Other non-java
environments; Programming static and mobile agents in any one such environment.

The theory of quantum information and quantum computation; classical information theory,
compression of quantum information, transmission of quantum information through noisy
channels, quantum enter element, quantum cryptography, classical complexity theory,
quantum complexity; efficient quantum algorithms; quantum error-correcting codes, faulttolerant quantum algorithms; quantum error-correcting codes, fault-tolerant quantum
computation; and physical implementations of quantum computations.

Positive and negative effects of the computers and ICT on human beings and societies.
Computing as a profession, organization using computers, sociological impacts of Computers
individual and computers, computer as audit tool, computers in banking, computer based
information systems and telecommunications, companies in consultancy servers, design and
construction, education, government insurance, stock-brokerage, legal and medical
professions.

Review of Artificial Intelligence and its place in experts system. Introduction to expert
systems and expert support system. Characteristics of experts systems: knowledge-based
systems. Types of expert systems.

Study of forensics; principles and practice of identification; pattern-matching of recognition,
computer forensics: pattern recognition, data mining, machine learning algorithms and
visualization, sequence alignment, application to biological sciences, DNA-gene finding,
genome assembly, drug design, drug discovery, protein structure alignment, protein structure prediction, prediction of gene expression and protein – protein interaction, genome-wide
association studies and the modeling of evolution.

Overview and Introduction to Bayes Decision Theory: Machine intelligence and applications,
pattern recognition concepts classification, regression, feature selection, supervised learning
class conditional probability distributions, Examples of classifiers bayes optimal classifier
and error, learning classification approaches. Linear machines: General and linear
discriminants, decision regions, single layer neural network, linear separability, general
gradient descent, perceptron learning algorithm, mean square criterion and widrow-Hoff
learning algorithm; multi-Layer perceptrons: two-layers universal approximators,
backpropagation learning, on-line, off-line error surface, important parameters. Learning
decision trees: Inference model, general domains, symbolic decision trees, consistency,
learning trees from training examples entropy, mutual information, ID3 algorithm criterion,
C4.5 algorithm continuous test nodes, confidence, pruning, learning with incomplete data.
Instance-based Learning: Nearest neighbor classification, k-nearest neighbor, nearest
neighbor error probability. Machine learning concepts and limitations: Learning theory,
formal model of the learnable, sample complexity, learning in zero-bayes and realizable case,
VC-dimension, fundamental algorithm independent concepts, hypothesis class, target class,
inductive bias, occam's razor, empirical risk, limitations of inference machines,
approximation and estimation errors, Tradeoff. Machine learning assessment and
Improvement: Statistical model selection, structural risk minimization, bootstrapping,
bagging, boosting. Support Vector Machines: Margin of a classifier, dual perceptron
algorithm, learning nonlinear hypotheses with perceptron kernel functions, implicit nonlinear feature space, theory, zero-Bayes, realizable infinite hypothesis class, finite covering,
margin-based bounds on risk, maximal margin classifier.

Characteristics of Neural Networks, Historical development of Neural Network principles,
Artificial Neural Networks: Terminology, Models of Neuron, Topology, Basic Learning
Laws. Activation and synaptic dynamics: Introduction, Activation Dynamic Models ,
Synaptic Dynamic Model, Learning Models, Learning Methods. Functional units of ANN for
pattern recognition tasks: Pattern Recognition Problem, Basic Functional Units, Pattern
Recognition Tasks by the Functional Units, Feed forward neural networks: introduction,
Analysis of Pattern Association Networks, Analysis of Pattern classification Networks,
Analysis of Pattern Mapping Networks. Feedback neural networks: Introduction, Analysis of
Linear Auto Associative FF Networks, Analysis of Pattern Storage Networks. Competitive
learning neural networks: Introduction, Components of a Competitive Learning Network,
Analysis of Feedback Layer for Different Output Functions, Analysis of Pattern Clustering
Networks, Analysis of Feed Mapping Network. Applications of neural systems: Applications
of Neural Algorithms and Systems character Recognition, Expert Systems Applications,
Neural Network Control Applications, Spatio - Temporal Pattern Recognition and other
Applications.

Overview of different types of decision making: strategic, tactical and operational.
Considerationof organisational structures. Mapping of databases, MIS, EIS, KBS, expert
systems, OR modelling systems and simulation, decision analytic systems onto activities
within an organisation. Extension to other ’non organisational’ areas of decision making, e.g.
military and emergency management. Studies of human cognition in relation to decision
making and the assimilation of information. Cultural issues. Implications for design of
decision making support. Communication issues. Normative, descriptive and prescriptive
analysis: requisite modelling. Contrast with recognition primed decision tools. Database,
MIS, EIS, KBS, Belief nets, data mining. OR modelling tools: simulation and optimisation.
History, design, implementation: benefits and pitfalls. Risk assessment. Decision analysis and
strategic decision support. Group decision support systems and decision conferencing.
Intelligent decision support systems: tools and applications. Cutting-edge decision support
technologies. History, design, implementation: benefits and pitfalls. Quality assurance and
validity of decision support. RODOS: A decision support system for nuclear emergencies. In
depth study of a system in which almost all of the techniques come together into one system.
Discussion of design. Implementation issues.
