Network Design
Digital Signal Processing
Mobile and Adaptive Systems
Internet Technology
Network Administration and Management
Advanced Topics in Computer Network
Network Programming
Network Performance Evaluation
Wireless and Ad-hoc Networks
Network Security


Requirements, planning, and choosing technology: System requirements, traffic sizing
characteristics time and delay consideration. Traffic Engineering and Capacity planning:
Background (Throughput calculations), Traffic engineering basics (Traffic characteristics),
Traditional Traffic engineering, Queued data and packet switched traffic modeling,
Designing for peaks, Delay or Latency, Availability and reliability, Capacity planning and
Network vision, Design tool, Categories of tools, Classes of design tool, Components of
design projects, Types of design projects. Technology Comparisons: Circuits-messagepacket and cell switching methods, Packet switching service aspects, Generic packet
switching network characteristics, Private verses public networking, Public network service
selection, Business aspects of Packet-Frame and cell switching services, High speed LAN
protocols comparisons, Application performance needs. Access Network Design: Network
design layers, Access layer design, Access network capacity, network topology and
hardware, completing the access network design. Backbone Network Design: Backbone
requirements, Network capacities, Topologies, Topologies strategies, Tuning the network.

Introduction; brief review of analogue and digital signal processing systems, discrete time
linear time-invariant signal processing systems; design of finite impulse response digital
filters, introduction to z-transforms and infinite Impulse response type discrete time filters
design of infinite impulse response type digital filters using analogue filter approximations;
digital processing of analogue signals and other data, introduction to the discrete Fourier
transform.

Introduction and overview; properties of wireless: PANs and WANs: Ad-hoc and
infrastructure networks; physical constraints and limitations (transmission and reception),
network structures and architectures, including hand-off and mobility support at the
physical/link level; example technologies at the physical/link layers; PANS Bluetooth, LANs
IEEE802.11 HiperLAN, basic GSM and GPRS network structures and protocol architectures,
next generation wireless overview including UMTs, IMT-2000 and W-CSMA; mobile IP;
mobilePv4 and mobileIPv6, problems. With routine, quantity of service and security,
overview of use of intelligence in mobile systems and power management issues; file
systems: CODA and the like and mobile infrastructures support. Adaptive and reconfigurable systems, mobile multimedia and its relationship to proxying, context sensitive
applications, ubiquitous computing, pervasive computing and ambient networking, overlay
networks and vertical hand-offs, programmable networking and applications for mobile
systems, code mobility and control/signaling.

Introduction to Internet, standards and specifications; survey of contemporary internet
technologies; Current Internet tools; Designing and publishing a web server; www
programmed markup languages: Using alternative protocols in www, Adding multimedia
features to www; Server side programming, client programming and database programming
for the web; Security and Privacy.

The rules governing IP address classes and netmasks, Configuring the resolver library to
arrange for TCP/IP name service, Bringing interfaces up and down, and set their IP addresses
and netmasks, Setting the default route in the kernel routing table. Understanding the
significance of the /etc/services file and well-known port numbers, Configuring the inet
daemon, Using telnet to contact servers directly, using the ping command to test network
connectivity, netstat command to examine kernel tables pertaining to networking, trace-route
command to discover network paths, tcpdump to examine all network traffic. Methods used
to bring interfaces up and down. Basics of configuring and using the Domain Name Service,
sendmail, the Network Information System, Network File System: Structure and function of
the Domain Name Service (DNS), Setting up a Linux machine to function as a DNS server,
Configuring and using sendmail, Setting up an NIS domain with an NIS master server and
NIS clients.

Data Communications: Business Drivers and Networking Directions : Data communication
Past and future. Understanding the standards and their maker: Creating standards: players
and Process, Current forums, Standard protocols, Layered reference models: The OSIRM,
Standard computer architectures. Introduction to Transmission Technologies: Hardware
selection in the design process. Optical Networking: SONET/SDH standards, Dense
wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM), Performance and Design considerations.
Physical Layer Protocols and Access Technologies: Physical Layer
Protocols and Interfaces, Accessing the Network, Copper access technologies, Cable Access
Technologies, Fiber Access Technologies, Air Access Technologies. Common Protocols
and Interfaces in the LAN environment: Data link layers protocols, LLC and MAC sub
layer protocol, Ethernet, Token Ring, Token Bus and FDDI, Bridge protocols, Switching in
the LAN environment. Frame Relay: FR specification and design, VoFR: Performance and
Design considerations, Advantages and disadvantages of FR. Common WAN Protocol:
ATM: Many faces of ATM, ATM protocol operation (ATM cell and Transmission), ATM
networking basics, Theory of operations, BISDN protocol reference model, PHY layer, ATM
layer (Protocol model), ATM layer and cell (Definition), Traffic descriptors and parameters,
Traffic and Congestion control defined, AAL Protocol model, Traffic contract and QoS, User
plane overview, Control plane AAL, Management plane, Sub-DS3 ATM, ATM public
services. Common Protocols and Interfaces in the Upper Layers(TCP/IP): Background
(Routing protocols), TCP/IP suite, Network layer (Internetwork layer), Transport layer,
Application layer, Addressing and routing design. Mature Packet Switched Protocol: ITU
Recommendation X.25, User connectivity, Theory of Operation, Network layer functions,
X.75 Internetworking protocol, switched multimegabit data service (SMDS), SMDS and
IEEE 802.6, Subscriber Interface and Access protocol, Addressing and Traffic control.
Requirements Definition: User requirements, Traffic sizing, Traffic characteristics,
Protocols, Time and Delay considerations, Connectivity, Availability, Reliability and
Maintainability, Service aspects, Budget constraints.

Sockets and Socket Address structures, Concept of Zombies, Daemon Processes, Super
servers, Concurrent versus Iterative servers, Protocol Independence, Error Handling: Wrapper
functions, OSI Model, Unix standards. TCP Connection establishment and Termination, Port
Numbers and Concurrent Servers, Protocol Usage by common Internet Applications. UDP
Communication Semantics, UDP Echo Server, Echo Client working, Protocol Usage by
Common Internet Applications. Sockets Address Structures, Byte ordering & M anipulation
Functions, TCP Socket System Calls, TCP Client-Server E.g., I/O Multiplexing, Signal
Handling in Concurrent Servers. Socket Options, Elementary Names Address Conversions,
Ipv4 and Ipv6 Interoperability.

Network performance modeling- Creating traffic matrix, design tools, components of design
tools, types of design projects. Technology Comparisons- Generic packet switching networks
characteristics, private vs.public networking, Business aspects of packet, frame and cell
switching services, High speed LAN protocols comparison, Application performance needs,
Throughput, burstiness, response time and delay tolerance, selecting service provider, vendor,
service levels etc. Access Network Design- N/W design layers, Access N/W design, access
n/w capacity, Backbone n/w design, Backbone segments, backbone capacity, topologies,
Tuning the network, securing the network, Design for network security. Documentation and
network management- Documentation, network management, SNMP, RMON Network
Optimization- Network optimization theory: Goals of network optimization, Measurements
for network optimization, optimization tools, optimization techniques.

Overview-Symmetric Ciphers: Classical Encryption Techniques Symmetric Ciphers: Block
ciphers and the Data Encryption Standards, Public key Encryption and Hash Functions:
Public-Key Cryptography and RSA Network Security Practices: Authentication applicationsElectronic Mail Security, Network Security Practices: IP Security-Web Security System
Security: Intruders-Malicious Software-Firewalls

